### Signals

### 1: Overview

* Signal is generated somewhere. It is considered delivered when the process sees it. Meanwhile, it is considered pending.
* Normally, a pending signal is delivered to a process as soon as it is next scheduled to run, or immediately if the process is already running 
* If a process cannot receive a signal at the moment, signal gets OR'd to a signal mask. Notice that the process has no way to know if it only has one or more signals of the same type being blocked

### 2: Types and default actions

* possible consequences: core dump, ignore, terminate, stop, continue

### 3: Disposing signals

* Sigaction (preferred) / signal (varies wildly from differnet unix implementations)
* void ( *signal(int sig, void (*handler)(int)) ) (int); => Returns previous signal disposition on success, or SIG_ERR on error
* signal registers a handle?

void (*oldHandler)(int);
oldHandler = signal(SIGINT, newHandler);
if (oldHandler == SIG_ERR)
 errExit("signal");
/* Do something else here. During this time, if SIGINT is
 delivered, newHandler will be used to handle the signal. */
if (signal(SIGINT, oldHandler) == SIG_ERR)
 errExit("signal");
/* 
It is not possible to use signal() to retrieve the current disposition of a signal
without at the same time changing that disposition. To do that, we must use
sigaction(). 
*/

Instead of specifying the address of a function as the handler argument of signal(),
we can specify one of the following values:
SIG_DFL
Reset the disposition of the signal to its default (Table 20-1). This is useful
for undoing the effect of an earlier call to signal() that changed the disposition for the signal.
SIG_IGN
Ignore the signal. If the signal is generated for this process, the kernel
silently discards it. The process never even knows that the signal occurred.

## 4: Signal handlers

* Signal can interrupt program at any point in the control flow
* Kernel will take over and execute handler on behalf of the program
* Program resumes at the point it was interrupted


## 5: Sending signals

* int kill(pid_t pid, int sig); => pid = who receives. 0 =sucess, else = error
* pid = 0: everybody on process group, else process id
* pid < -1 => , the signal is sent to all of the processes in the process group
whose ID equals the absolute value of pid. 
* If pid equals –1, the signal is sent to every process for which the calling process
has permission to send a signal, except init (process ID 1) and the calling process. 
* If no process matches the specified pid, kill() fails and sets errno to ESRCH (“No such
process”)

## 6: Check existance of process

* wait() syscall
* Semaphores and exclusive file locks
* IPC channels such as pipes and FIFOs
* The /proc/PID interface

## 7: raise and killpg

* int raise(int sig); => sends signal to self
* int killpg(pid_t pgrp, int sig); => sends signal to all members of a process group

## 8: Displaying Signal Descriptions

* char *strsignal(int sig); => Returns pointer to signal description string
* void psignal(int sig, const char *msg);

## 9: Signal sets

* int sigemptyset(sigset_t *set); => initializes a signal set to contain no members. 
* int sigfillset(sigset_t *set); => initializes a set to contain all signals 
* int sigaddset(sigset_t *set, int sig); => adds signal to a set
* int sigdelset(sigset_t *set, int sig); => removes signal from set

## 10: Signal mask

* Bitmask that sets whihc signals are to be blocked
* int sigprocmask(int how, const sigset_t *set, sigset_t *oldset); => manipulates signal masl

## 11: Pending signals

* If a process receives a signal that it is currently blocking, that signal is added to the
process’s set of pending signals. 
* int sigpending(sigset_t *set); -> Returns 0 on success, or –1 on error. mask is written to *set

## 12: signals are not queued

* Bitmask only keeps one ocurrence. Additional ones are ignored

## 13: Changing signal dispositions

* int sigaction(int sig, const struct sigaction *act, struct sigaction *oldact);
Returns 0 on success, or –1 on error

## 14: Waiting for a Signal

* suspends execution of the process until the call is interrupted by a
signal handler 
* int pause(void); => Always returns –1 with errno set to EINTR