### 21: Signal handlers

## 1 - Designing signal handlers

* Signals are not queued. Design handlers to account for potentially multiple signal ocurrences
* Not all syscalls or libs are safe to be called from signal handlers
* Reentrant function: a function is reentrant <=> any two threads of execution can be safely executed with any interleaving
* Async signal safe function: safe to be called by a signal handler because it is either reentrant or uninterruptable by a signal
* One option to assure safety of signal handlers is to only call reentrant functions
* Another is to block signals while calling unsafe functions or accessing global/static data structures
* errno is a global variable, thus anything that uses it in handlers is unsafe. Trick to workaround:

void
handler(int sig)
{
 int savedErrno;
 savedErrno = errno;
 /* Now we can execute a function that might modify errno */
 errno = savedErrno;
}

* sig_atomic_t, for which reads and writes are guaranteed to be atomic => use this to share data between program and sig handler
* ++ and -- do not apply for sig_atomic_t. we are only assured to set within handler and read from program safely

## 2 - Methods to terminate signal handlers

* _exit
* exit is unsafe because it flushe stdio buffer before exit
* kill or raise to finish process
* nonlocal goto from signal handler
* abort function to terminate process with core dump

-- Nonlocal goto: 
 * whenever a sighandler is started, the kernel adds the originating signal to the process signal mask
 * longjump does not necessarily remove the signal from the signal mask. depends on unix implementation
 * int sigsetjmp(sigjmp_buf env, int savesigs); => Returns 0 on initial call, nonzero on return via siglongjmp()
 * If savesigs is nonzero, then the process signal mask that is current at the time of the sigsetjmp() call is saved in
env and restored by a later siglongjmp() call specifying the same env argument
 * If savesigs is 0, then the process signal mask is not saved and restored.
 * void siglongjmp(sigjmp_buf env, int val); => The siglongjmp() function restores the environment saved by the most recent invocation of sigsetjmp() in the same thread. After siglongjmp() is completed, program execution continues as if the corresponding invocation of sigsetjmp() had just returned the value specified by val.

  longjmp example:

    Signal mask at startup:
    <empty signal set>
    Calling setjmp()
    Type Control-C to generate SIGINT
    Received signal 2 (Interrupt), signal mask is:
    2 (Interrupt)
    After jump from handler, signal mask is:
    2 (Interrupt)
    (At this point, typing Control-C again has no effect, since SIGINT is blocked)
    Type Control-\ to kill the program
    Quit

  siglongjmp example:

  Signal mask at startup:
    <empty signal set>
    Calling sigsetjmp()
    Type Control-C
    Received signal 2 (Interrupt), signal mask is:
    2 (Interrupt)
    After jump from handler, signal mask is:
    <empty signal set>

 * caveat: sigjmp can be called before signal handler is set. use a canJmp guard variable to return inside the handler instead of executing siglongjmp

 * abort(): terminates program and generates a core dump by raising a sigabort
 * abort can be avoided by using a non local goto within the handler
 * if abort does not terminate the first time, then it resets the handler to DFLT and, in the second abort signal, termination is garanteed while flushing stdio buffers
 * sigaltstack: allocates a stack for the execution of sighandler to workaround OOM errors.
 * When a process attempts to grow its stack beyond the maximum possible size,
the kernel generates a SIGSEGV signal for the process. However, since the stack space
is exhausted, the kernel can’t create a frame for any SIGSEGV handler that the program may have established. Consequently, the handler is not invoked, and the process is terminated (the default action for SIGSEGV).
 * if we need sigsegv to be handled, we use sigaltstack
 * int sigaltstack(const stack_t *sigstack, stack_t *old_sigstack); => Returns 0 on success, or –1 on error
 * Blocking syscalls get interrupted by signal handlers by default. 
 * Must manually restart syscalls unless the flga SA_RESTART is specified in sigaction. does not always work

 
